Italy F1 Track & Grandstand Guide | Monza Circuit | Monza Race Track

As Monaco is referred to as the “Jewel in the Crown”, it is impossible to speak about Monza without referring to it as the “Temple of Speed”. Situated 25 minutes north of Milan, Monza has been a staple of the F1 calendar throughout its history. Monza has seen few changes to the circuit, which pleasingly has allowed the pure speed factor to be maintained. Seeing a Formula One car live hitting speeds of up to 380km/h can only be experienced in Monza, which makes this track one of must-sees on the F1 calendar. No matter how Ferrari are performing on track, you will also see the most passionate fan base in the sport - known as theTifosi -come out in their droves in a sea of red.
While each of ourItalian Grand Prix Packagescomes with a pre-defined grandstand ticket, we’ve created this Italian F1 Track guide to help you choose an alternative.
With many grandstands to choose from at Monza, you are never short of options. The group of six grandstands on the main straight is at the absolute epicentre of the unrivalled Monza atmosphere. Grandstand 1 known as “Centrale” is the largest of these grandstands and also provides partial coverage from the hot Italian sun. Here you will have views of the most iconic start/finish straight on the grid, as well as pit-exit and the run into turn 1. Situated at the heart of the action, you are never far away from the plentiful Italian food options, as well as many different merchandise stalls – including an F1 outlet if discount merchandise from older and defunct teams are more to your liking. Of course, being on the main straight means you are exactly where you need to be for the end of the race and the most famous post-race track invasion of them all. Be sure to admire the famous banking to the right of these grandstands at the end of the weekend!
A short trek down the start/finish straight is Grandstand 7, which is the best position to see the high-speed pit exit. This shoots right into the apex of turn 1, where at times cars are side-by-side as one is at the exit of the pits, and the other flying at full speed along the straight. Close to all the amenities and with large screens viewable from your seats, Grandstand 7 is a great option if you want to be further along the main straight and close to turn 1.
Sitting on the outside of turn 1, the views at Grandstands 8A&B are outstanding. You will feel the true sense of speed and an F1 car’s braking ability as you have a front-on view of the straight and turn 1. It is here you will likely witness most of the overtaking for the weekend, with the chicane at Turns 1 and 2 coming at the end of a DRS and heavy braking zone. The first corner of Monza is always action-packed – particularly on the opening lap with 20 cars trying to squeeze into the tight chicane often providing dramatic incidents – and who can forget Max Verstappen and Lewis Hamilton in 2021.
Directly opposite Grandstand 8, Grandstand 6 is perched on the inside of Turns 1 and 2. Similar to the benefits listed for Grandstand 8 – here you will witness all the action and overtaking into turn 1, with some seats also providing views of the exit of Turn 2.
Known asSeconda Variante,or second chicane, Grandstands 9 and 10 are sat at the end of the short straight into Turns 4 and 5, also known for plenty of action. While there is no DRS to assist overtaking, a good exit from the opening chicane will often see wheel-to-wheel racing and with the high-raised kerbs – also driver error from time to time. There is a giant screen opposite meaning you’ll always be on top of the goings on throughout the weekend. Should you wish to explore the track, the iconic Lesmo corners are also just a short 10 minute walk from your seats.
Named after the late double-world champion Alberto Ascari who tragically passed away at this section of track in 1955 these grandstands will provide you amazing views of F1 cars at high speed – almost glued to the track. Watch in awe as F1 cars come out at full speed of the forest section in the second DRS zone into the fast Ascari chicane, and onto the back straight. There are screens visible from all spots here, with ease of access to food, drinks, toilets and merchandise also a highlight to both the inside section and outside of the track thanks to the multiple bridges.
Just down from the Ascari chicane and still on the inside of the circuit are the three grouped stands of 18-20. Directly behind the stands is the paddock, as well as a covered marquee with a large screen if you wanted to sit on the grass and relax under the Italian sun throughout the weekend. Seats-wise, look to your left and you will see the cars come through the fast Ascari chicane, and look to your left and you will have a panoramic view of the back straight leading into the famous Parabolica corner. With the general admission spectators standing directly opposite you, the atmosphere is party-like all weekend long.
Likely only rivalling Eau Rouge/Raidillon as iconic corners on the current F1 calendar, Parabolica has the “has to be seen to be believed” factor. In these set of six Grandstands (21A-E and 22) you will be sitting on the outside of the track, truly experiencing the sheer speed and cornering ability of F1 cars. Watch in awe as cars fly past at 340kph, brake heavily and flick right into the final corner of the circuit at 180kph. While Grandstand 21E is farthest from Parabolica and the highlights are top speed and slipstreaming, Grandstands 21A and 22 are right on corner entry and exit, which means cornering will be your highlight. Being on the outside of the track also means you avoid the busy journey through the bridges to visit the F1 fanzone and highest choice of food and drink options at the track.
Opposite Grandstands 21-22 are a set of grandstands which sit on the inside of the parabolica corner. Stands GF1:12 sit directly opposite stands 21-22, on the entry to the parabolica. Whereas stands GF12:19 sit on the apex and exit of the corner.
On the inside of the Parabolica turn is Grandstand 23, a smaller set of two stands which alternate the views seen at Grandstands 21/22 – here you will see corner exit and have some views of the famous banking section of track. You will need to cross one of the multiple bridges if you want to visit the F1 fanzone and large section of grassy areas, but the bonus of Grandstand 23 is that you will be on the podium-end of the circuit when it comes to entering the track post-race.
At the beginning of the start/finish straight and closer to Parabolica, Grandstands 24 and 25 offer a great view of corner exit and the DRS activation zone. Here you will also have views of pit-entry – the fastest one on the calendar as the cars enter at full speed before hitting the brakes to 80kph. To the right of these stands you will be able to see the breathtaking old banked corner, and you are on the right end of the track if you are looking to watch the podium celebrations from your seats. As with all grandstands along the start/finish straight, the atmosphere is electric all weekend long – particularly during the post-race celebrations. Plenty of food, drink and toilet options are right on the doorstep of these stands.
Grandstands 26-30 sit quite possibly the most passionate set of fans not only in Formula One but world sport as a whole. A popular choice for spectators, these stands will be packed withtifosiin a sea of red all weekend long. Sat directly opposite the unique podium, you will be able to witness all the pre, during and post race action from your seats. A truly unforgettable experience awaits in these stands – witnessing cars at their highest speed, the action packed start, and the singing and dancing long into the evening – particularly if there is a red car on the podium!
Phone: 020 3966 5680