Race Ready: Monza F1 Schedule and Travel Guide 2024

Welcome to the Race Ready for the 2024 Italian F1 Grand Prix, taking place close to Milan at Monza, from 30 August – 1 September.
We’re here to ensure you have all the information available at your fingertips to enable you to get the most out of your live motorsport experience. The 2024 race has a very limited number of tickets available – book them on ourItalian F1 Grand Prix event page.
Wondering what time the Italian Grand Prix starts UK time? Those times are listed too!
Formula 2 and Formula 3 races will both return for the Italian Grand Prix, as well as the Porsche Mobil 1 Supercup and Pirelli Hot Laps. See the times of all the F2 and F3 sessions in the schedule above. There will be plenty of action to entertain fans across the weekend at the Autodromo Nazionale Monza.
Use our track map to plan your trip as best you can. You can download the image or take a screenshot to have it to hand during the Grand Prix weekend.
It is essential to have your priorities in order whenplanning your trip to a Formula 1 Grand Prix. Use the map above to help you in your planning.  Use our handyItalian Grand Prix Grandstand Guideto make sure you find the right spot for your Formula 1 trip to Milan.
The Autodromo Nazionale Monza is located very conveniently close to the fashion and finance capital of Italy, Milan. There is a wealth of hotel and AirBnb options in the city which is an easy commutable distance from the track.
See our guide on getting to the Monza in the section below.
The Italian Grand Prix is up there with the most popular races on the entireFormula 1 calendar. The Tifosi make for a truly unforgettable experience, no matter how their beloved Ferrari perform over the weekend.
We would recommend staying in the north of the city as this will provide the easiest access both to the Milan Malpensa Airport (main airport for international arrivals) and the Monza Circuit itself.
However, there is an option to stay even closer to the circuit…
Pitching tent for the weekend of a Formula 1 race is a bucket list activity – and some fans will do it every year. Check out our full guide to camping at the Italian Grand Prix below:
Organising travel from your accommodation can be a stressful part of a Grand Prix weekend. However, a benefit of hosting races close to major cities is the efficient transport for getting to and from the track.
However you decide to travel, take the stress out of it with our handy guide to getting to the Autodromo Nazionale Monza:
112is the general emergency number
The local currency is theEUR €. The exchange rate is around1 GBP to 1.19 EUR. All goods and services are paid in the local currency.
The official language isItalian.
Prohibited Items at the Autodromo Nazionale Monza.
If you require assistance during the race weekend, feel free to contact our customer service team through theMotorsport Tickets Help Centre.
If you have some more queries or would like more information, head over to ourFAQs section.